KubeSwift Architecture
Purpose
This document explains the internal architecture of KubeSwift, a Kubernetes-native virtual machine runtime built on Cloud Hypervisor.
It is intended for:
contributors
operators
AI assistants helping develop the project
It describes:
system architecture
runtime lifecycle
controller behavior
networking model
image pipeline
debugging surfaces

System Overview
KubeSwift allows Kubernetes users to run virtual machines as native Kubernetes workloads.
Each VM is represented by a SwiftGuest custom resource and executed inside a launcher pod running Cloud Hypervisor.
The architecture separates:

Control Plane
Runtime Plane
Guest VM


High-Level Architecture

User
 │
 │ kubectl / helm / swiftctl
 │
 ▼
Kubernetes API Server
 │
 │ CRDs
 │
 ▼
KubeSwift Controllers
 │
 │ create launcher pod
 │
 ▼
SwiftGuest Pod
 │
 ├─ network-init (init container)
 │
 └─ launcher container (swiftletd)
        │
        ▼
     Cloud Hypervisor
        │
        ▼
      Guest VM


Core Components
CRDs
KubeSwift defines four primary Kubernetes resources.
SwiftGuest
Represents a running virtual machine.
Example:

apiVersion: swift.kubeswift.io/v1alpha1
kind: SwiftGuest
spec:
  imageRef:
    name: ubuntu-cloud
  guestClassRef:
    name: default
  seedProfileRef:
    name: minimal

Status contains:

phase
conditions
podRef
nodeName
network.primaryIP


SwiftImage
Represents a VM disk image.
Example:

spec:
  source:
    http:
      url: https://cloud-images.ubuntu.com/noble/current/noble-server-cloudimg-amd64.img
  format: qcow2

During import:

qcow2 → raw conversion

Runtime disks must be raw.

SwiftSeedProfile
Defines cloud-init configuration.
Used to inject:

user data
metadata
network config
SSH keys

Rendered as a NoCloud seed ISO.

SwiftGuestClass
Defines default runtime resources:

CPU
memory
storage defaults


Controller Architecture
Controllers are written in Go using controller-runtime.
Main controllers:

internal/controller/swiftguest
internal/controller/swiftimage


SwiftImage Controller
Handles image preparation.
Workflow:

SwiftImage created
      │
      ▼
Import Job created
      │
      ▼
Image downloaded
      │
      ▼
qemu-img convert qcow2 → raw
      │
      ▼
Artifact stored
      │
      ▼
status.phase = Ready


SwiftGuest Controller
Responsible for launching the VM.
Workflow:

SwiftGuest created
      │
      ▼
Resolve references
      │
      ▼
Generate runtime intent
      │
      ▼
Create launcher pod
      │
      ▼
Update status


Runtime Intent
Before launching a VM, the controller creates a runtime intent describing how the VM should run.
Example:

{
  "guestId": "default/sample",
  "cpu": 2,
  "memory": 2048,
  "rootDisk": {
      "path": "/var/lib/kubeswift/disks/root/image.raw"
  },
  "seedPath": "/var/lib/kubeswift/seed"
}

The runtime intent is mounted into the launcher container.

Launcher Pod
Each SwiftGuest runs inside a pod.

SwiftGuest Pod
 ├─ init container: network-init
 └─ launcher container: swiftletd


network-init
Prepares networking inside the pod.
Steps:

create bridge br0
create tap interface tap0
attach tap0 to bridge
start dnsmasq DHCP server

Example DHCP range:

10.244.x.x


swiftletd
swiftletd is the VM launcher written in Rust.
Responsibilities:

load runtime intent
prepare runtime directory
generate seed ISO
spawn Cloud Hypervisor
monitor VM lifecycle
discover guest IP
report status


Runtime Directory
Each VM gets a runtime directory.
Example:

/var/lib/kubeswift/run/default-sample

Contains:

ch.sock
serial.sock
seed/
seed.iso


Cloud Hypervisor Invocation
swiftletd launches Cloud Hypervisor with arguments similar to:

cloud-hypervisor \
  --api-socket path=/var/lib/kubeswift/run/default-sample/ch.sock \
  --memory size=2048M \
  --cpus boot=2 \
  --kernel /usr/share/kubeswift-firmware/hypervisor-fw \
  --disk path=/var/lib/kubeswift/disks/root/image.raw \
  --disk path=/var/lib/kubeswift/run/default-sample/seed.iso \
  --serial socket=/var/lib/kubeswift/run/default-sample/serial.sock \
  --console off \
  --net tap=tap0

Important:

root disk must be raw


Networking Model
Networking uses tap + bridge inside the pod.

Guest VM
   │
virtio-net
   │
tap0
   │
br0
   │
pod network

dnsmasq provides DHCP.
Example lease range:

10.244.125.10 → 10.244.125.20


IP Discovery
swiftletd monitors DHCP leases.
When a lease appears:

guest IP discovered

Then:

SwiftGuest.status.network.primaryIP updated

Example:

status:
  network:
    primaryIP: 10.244.125.12


Guest Lifecycle
SwiftGuest lifecycle:

Pending
   │
   ▼
Scheduled
   │
   ▼
Running
   │
   ▼
Stopped / Failed

Conditions include:

Resolved
PodScheduled
GuestRunning


Console Access
Guest console uses the Cloud Hypervisor serial socket.

serial.sock

swiftctl connects using:

kubectl exec
socat

Example:

swiftctl console sample


SSH Access
SSH access is provided through cloud-init.
Seed profile injects:

authorized_keys

Once networking works:

ssh ubuntu@<primaryIP>


CLI
swiftctl is the KubeSwift CLI.
Planned commands:

swiftctl console
swiftctl start
swiftctl stop
swiftctl restart
swiftctl debug

Modeled after virtctl from KubeVirt.

Distribution
KubeSwift is distributed using OCI artifacts.
Images:

ghcr.io/projectbeskar/kubeswift/controller-manager
ghcr.io/projectbeskar/kubeswift/swiftletd

Helm chart:

oci://ghcr.io/projectbeskar/charts/kubeswift


Release Model

dev builds: sha-<git-sha>
RC builds:  vX.Y.Z-rc.N
stable:     vX.Y.Z


Smoke Test
Smoke test verifies full system functionality.
Steps:

create SwiftGuestClass
create SwiftImage
create SwiftSeedProfile
create SwiftGuest
wait for image ready
wait for guest running
verify seed mount
verify VM launch
verify networking

Success requires:

GuestRunning=True
status.network.primaryIP populated


Debugging Surfaces
Key debugging commands.
Inspect guest:

kubectl get swiftguest sample -o yaml

Launcher logs:

kubectl logs <pod> -c launcher

Runtime files:

kubectl exec -it <pod> -- ls /var/lib/kubeswift/run/<guest>

Console:

swiftctl console sample

Networking:

kubectl exec <pod> -- ip a
kubectl exec <pod> -- brctl show


Known Complexity Areas
These areas often cause bugs.
Networking

tap device reuse
bridge state
DHCP discovery

Image preparation

qcow2 → raw conversion
compressed qcow2 blocks

Status reporting

GuestRunning condition
IP discovery
controller status updates


Design Principles
KubeSwift prioritizes:

minimal architecture
clear runtime control
Cloud Hypervisor compatibility
Kubernetes-native APIs
strong operability

Avoid:

unnecessary dependencies
container-runtime abstractions
complex orchestration layers


Future Development Areas
Upcoming features include:

SSH access improvements
console reliability
guest lifecycle operations
networking robustness
status improvements

Long-term features may include:

snapshots
migration
advanced networking


Summary
KubeSwift is a lightweight Kubernetes-native VM runtime.
It combines:

Kubernetes controllers
Rust runtime
Cloud Hypervisor
cloud-init
OCI distribution

The goal is a simple, debuggable virtualization platform tightly integrated with Kubernetes.